---
layout: post
subheadline: "Why we teach what we teach"
authors: ["Francois Michonneau"]
title: "The R ecology lessons"
teaser: ""
date: 2016-11-28
header:
    image_fullwidth: "light-blue-wood-texture.jpg"
categories:
    - blog
comments: true
show_meta: true
redirect_from: /blog/rlesson/
---


The Data Carpentry lessons are aimed at learners who have never programmed
before. Learning something new, especially coding, can feel intimidating. Yet
learners attending our workshops are motivated as they realize it is a skill
they will eventually need to master to be able to manage and make sense of the
data they are generating in their research. When learning a programming
language, you eventually need to master two things: the syntax of the language
(e.g., where the parentheses and the commas go), and the intricacies of the
language that will make you write less code and faster code (e.g., taking
advantage of the vectorized operations). The first can be learned relatively
quickly, the second takes years of practice. One of the advantages of learning
the basics of programming during a workshop is that we can teach learners good
practices from the start, rather than having to go through the painful
experiences that typically accompany self-learning experiences.

We teach good practices but not necessarily best practices. When you first learn
subtraction, your teacher taught you that you can't give away six marbles if you only
have four. And when you first learned about square roots, your teacher told you
that you can only calculate the square root of a positive number. Teachers don't
cover negative numbers and complex numbers until you master other skills that
are needed to understand these concepts.

We are working on a tight schedule during a workshop. In two days, we need to
empower learners to demonstrate that coding isn't scary, and that with a little
knowledge and good practices, you can achieve a lot. During this time, we need
to tackle problems that are realistic enough that learners can project the
skills we teach them to their own datasets/problems, but not so difficult that
learners are demotivated by the amount of knowledge they will need to master to
be able to be productive on their own with their data.

One way we do that is by building the lesson around a dataset learners can
easily relate to. The dataset for the ecology-themed lesson is from a real
long-term experiment that uses variables anyone working in ecology will be familiar
with: species names, measurements (lengths and weights), date of
observation. The dataset is large enough (35,000+ rows) that manipulating it in
a spreadsheet program would be difficult, but small enough that working on it
with a programming language is almost instantaneous.

The other way is by putting a lot of thought into selecting what we cover
during these two half days. We focus on how to organize the code, the data, and
the files that make up a typical research project. There are now many resources
to learn R online (some of which can be useful to the learners after a
workshop), but one way Data Carpentry stands out is by demonstrating how good
practices for data formatting and organization can facilitate data analysis. We
reinforce this idea by using the same dataset throughout the workshop.

The main skills we focus on in the R lesson are how to prepare datasets for
analysis and visualization. In Data Carpentry, we teach packages from
the [tidyverse](https://blog.rstudio.org/2016/09/15/tidyverse-1-0-0/) (formerly
known as the Hadleyverse) which are sophisticated and elegant additions to the R
language to work with data. Most functions are verbs (e.g., `filter()`), and use
a limited vocabulary that distills operations needed to manipulate data. For
instance, the six functions we introduce in the lesson
on
[`dplyr`](https://cran.rstudio.com/web/packages/dplyr/vignettes/introduction.html) are
enough to cover most cases of subseting data and extracting relevant information
from it. We use [ggplot2](http://ggplot2.org/) for data visualization because it
allows learners to rapidly produce high-quality graphics. In addition, these
packages encourage best and consistent data formatting practices by relying on
the [tidy data](http://vita.had.co.nz/papers/tidy-data.pdf) concept (one row for
each observation, one column per variable, one table per observational unit). We
first introduce the tidy data concept in
the
[spreadsheet lesson](http://www.datacarpentry.org/spreadsheet-ecology-lesson/)
and emphasize its utility in each of the lessons.

Because of the duration of the workshop, we have to leave a lot of things out of
the lesson. We want to limit the information overload. For instance, we don't
cover lists. While they are essential to programming in R, a lot of data analysis
can be done without knowing about them. On the other hand, we cover factors
because learners will encounter them when importing data in R, and their
behavior is often misunderstood. When factors are covered during a workshop, it
will be easier for learners to know how to deal with them in the future.

During workshops, "Challenges" are a core component of the learning
experience. After each concept the instructor covers, the challenges are the
opportunity for learners to practice what they just learned. It is a form of
[formative assessment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formative_assessment)
that brings interactivity. The learners can witness for
themselves what they are now capable of doing with their newly acquired skills
(for instance, a beautiful plot), and it allows instructors to assess whether
the learners have assimilated the concepts taught. Compared with the passive
lecture format learners typically experience, they are not used to this level of
interactivity, and often praise these challenges in the workshop evaluations.

When beginning learning a new programming language, it can be frustrating to not
be able to generate the desired output or to be faced with cryptic error messages
because a comma or a quotation mark is missing. To limit this frustration, we
provide learners with a handout that contains a lot of the code already
typed. They can fill in the blanks, add their own comments, and bits of code to
it. It allows learners to focus on learning concepts and how they relate to each
others rather than obsessing over where the commas go.

I think it is also important to be realistic about the expectations one can have
after a 2-day workshop. Learning how to code takes time. Because it is a new
skill, learners will need to change the way they approach the analysis of their
data. Being confronted with something new can feel uncomfortable, and facing the
limits of one's knowledge can be frustrating. It is important to celebrate your
successes along the way. It will help you go through frustrating times. Having
people who can help you in your learning experience is also important: the
person sitting next to you at a workshop might be the best person to take on
this job. Finally, strive for best practices but not before you master the
["good enough" practices](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.00037).
