---
layout: post
subheadline:
title: "Job Posting: Workshop Administrator"
teaser:
header:
    image_fullwidth: "light-blue-wood-texture.jpg"
categories:
    - blog
comments: true
show_meta: true
authors: ["Belinda Weaver"]
redirect_from: /blog/ws-admin/
---

With the growth of Carpentry workshops all over the world, we are excited that Maneesha Sane is moving from Program 
Coordinator to Program Manager of Software and Data Carpentry. As Program Manager, 
she will continue to be involved in workshop coordination and instructor training and will 
oversee and ensure the quality and consistency of program operations. She will also work to 
develop processes, infrastructure and communications to consistently improve the workshop experience for instructors, hosts and learners.

To fill some of her workshop coordination responsibilities, Software and Data Carpentry are looking to 
hire a **part-time Workshop Administrator** to help set up workshops and ensure that they run smoothly.

The successful candidate will join a team of workshop coordinators around the world. In this job, you 
will manage workshop logistics, 
help communicate with hosts and instructors, and respond to general workshop inquiries.
 
We are looking for someone with strong organizational and communication skills, who can prioritize competing tasks and 
work independently. Strong attention to detail is a must. Enthusiasm for our mission of teaching people how to program is also a plus!

This is a remote position. The incumbent will be hired and paid as an independent contractor of our 501(c)3 fiscal sponsor, 
[NumFOCUS](https://www.numfocus.org/).  The position will begin as part-time, approximately 20 hours a week, but 
has the potential to become full time.

Review of applications will begin on July 17, 2017, and the position will remain open until filled.

For more details on the position and information on how to apply, please see 
the [full job posting](https://software-carpentry.org/jobs/).
